===== PAGE 52 =====
P a g e | 52 
 
7. Survey Calculation Methods 
7.1 Examples of Current Methods 
 
Over the years there have been several 
methods of calculating survey positions 
from the raw observations of measure 
depth, inclination and direction.  At the 
simplest level if a straight line model is 
used over a length dM with inclination I 
and Azimuth A, we can derive a shift in 
coordinates as in figure 42. 
 
This simple technique is often referred 
to as the Tangential Method and is 
relatively easy to hand calculate.  
However, the assumption that the 
inclination and direction remain 
unchanged for the interval can cause 
significant errors to accumulate along 
the wellpath. 
 
 
 
 
 
An improvement to this was the ‘Average Angle Method’ where the azimuth and inclination used in the above 
formulas was simply the average of the values at the start and end of the interval. 
 
In the days when there were no personal computers the average angle was the preferred method of calculating 
surveys and it produces results similar to the more recent minimum curvature method currently in use. 
 
 
 
 
      Average Angle Example 
 
      • 
Md1 = 1000   Inc1 = 28  Azi1 = 54 
      • 
Md2 = 1100   Inc2 = 32  Azi2 = 57 
      • 
Delta MD = 100 
      • 
Average Inc = 30 
      • 
Average Azi = 55.5 
      • 
Delta East = 100 sin(30) sin(55.5) = 41.2 
      • 
Delta North = 100 sin(30) cos(55.5) = 28.3 
      • 
Delta TVD = 100 cos(30) = 86.6 
 
 
 
Figure 42: Tangential method to derive a shift in coordinates 

===== PAGE 53 =====
P a g e | 53 
 
A further improvement was the Balanced Tangential Method whereby the angle observed at a survey station are 
applied half way back into the previous interval and half way forward into the next. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These techniques all suffer from the weakness that the wellpath is modelled as a straight line.  More recently, the 
computational ability of computers has allowed a more sophisticated approach.  In the summary slide figure 44 
we see two curved models. 
 
The one on the left assumes that the wellpath fits on the surface of a cylinder and therefore can have a horizontal 
and vertical radius.  The one on the right assumes the wellpath fits on the surface of a sphere and simply has one 
Figure 43: Balanced Tangential Method 
Figure 44: Methods of dealing with curvature 

===== PAGE 54 =====
P a g e | 54 
 
radius in a 3D plane that minimizes the curvature required to fit the angular observations.  This method, known as 
the ‘Minimum Curvature’ method, is now effectively the industry standard. 
 
 
Imagine a unit vector tangential to a survey point.  Its shift in x, y and z would be as shown above. The angle 
between any two unit vectors can be derived from inverse cosine of the vector dot product of the two vectors. 
This angle is the angle subtended at the centre of the arc and is assumed to have occurred over the observed 
change in measured depth.  From this the radius can be derived and a simple kite formed in 3D space whose 
smaller arm length follows vector A then vector B to arrive at position B. 
 
Notice however that the method assumes a constant arc from one station to the next and particularly when using 
mud motors, this is unlikely to be the case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
Figure 45: Minimum curvature method 

===== PAGE 55 =====
P a g e | 55 
 
8. Survey Frequency 
8.1 Determining TVD 
 
Consider two possible procedures for drilling from A to B - both of these trajectories start and end with the same 
attitude and have the same measured depth difference. 
 
 
Suppose we were at 50 degrees inclination at A and built to 60 degrees inclination at B. In the case on the left the 
curve comes first followed by a straight and vice versa on the right. Clearly the wellpaths are different but the 
surveys would be identical since the measured depths are the same, the azimuth has not changed and the 
inclinations have risen by 10 degrees.  Because a single arc is applied, there is a potential for significant TVD error 
to accumulate along the wellpath if the changes in geometry are not sufficiently observed.   
 
For this reason, it is often recommended that when building angle faster than 3 degrees per 100 ft (or 30 m) it is 
best to survey every pipe joint rather than every stand to ensure adequate observations to truly represent the 
well path.  In the next chapter it will be seen that a rate gyro can observe at very short intervals indeed with no 
additional survey time and in general these are better at determining TVD than MWD.  Normally however, gyro 
surveys are interpolated at 10 or 20 ft intervals or equivalent just for ease of handling and processing the data. 
 
8.2 Effect of Survey Interval on Well Path Positional Uncertainty 
 
It is important to note that our industry standard systematic error models have not traditionally modelled for the 
effect of survey interval. It is very hard to quantify what the effect of missing data might have been and so the 
error models have been published with the caveat that adequate surveys must be taken to accurately reflect the 
geometry of the wellpath. 
 
Figure 46: Example drilling trajectories 

===== PAGE 56 =====
P a g e | 56 
 
 
Clearly if the minimum curvature algorithm were applied to the survey on the left where the inclination and 
azimuth are identical at the start and end of the curve, a simple straight line path would be assumed whereas the 
reality is better represented by the surveys on the right. I conducted a study using some of Shell’s survey 
database a few years ago. I removed every second survey from some high intensity gyro surveys and recalculated. 
Then I removed more and plotted the errors against the survey interval. The actual positional error grew in a 
quadratic. Here is one example plot. 
 
 
On the x axis is the survey interval and the scatter on the y axis represents positional errors from the original 
surveyed position. The green histogram is a set of average positional errors for each survey interval in 10ft 
increments. 
 
The approximate equation relating these is of the order of .3 x (Interval/100)^2 which has an interesting effect. If 
this is even close to correct then reducing our survey interval from 90ft to 30ft reduces our positional error by a 
factor of 9 not 3. Similarly, we might expect that missing a 90ft survey will increase our positional error due to 
lack of surveys by a factor of 4 rather than 2. 

===== PAGE 57 =====
P a g e | 57 
 
 
What should we do about this?  Some companies would argue that a simple additional inclination and azimuth 
error should be added in proportion to their respective changes from one survey to the next. For example, we 
might add .1 x azimuth change as an azimuth error and perhaps 0.1 x inclination change as an inclination error. 
The shorter the interval, the smaller the change and therefore the smaller the error applied. Since the md 
difference is also proportional to the interval, this has a square term on interval just like the study shows. Others 
would argue that as we are trying to model missing data, we might generate misleading uncertainty models and 
we should cover this by best practice. 
Most companies agree that when the dogleg severity exceeds 3 degs / 100ft it is good practice to survey every 
single rather than every stand. 
 
However, there are some occasions where the lack of surveys has to be remedied long after the event. 
 
Sometimes when a well is misplaced in TVD, it is necessary to re-analyse the MWD survey to obtain a better 
estimate of TVD.  This is done by including the slide sheet information.  The technique can only be used as a rough 
guide to the likely TVD adjustment required but has often explained poor production results or severe 
disagreement between gyro and MWD depths. 
 
Using the slide sheet in figure 47 as an example: 
 
Looking at the data for BHA 6, we can see a few points where surveys were taken and several changes from 
rotating to oriented (sliding) mode.  The lengths and toolfaces are listed for each slide.  Whilst these values will 
only be approximate it is possible to then estimate the wellbore attitude at the points where the slides began and 
ended. 
 
Firstly if we take the total curvature generated over the BHA run by measuring the angle changes between 
surveys (see minimum curvature described above in chapter 7) we can work out the dogleg severity capability of 
Figure 47: Typical slide sheet 

===== PAGE 58 =====
P a g e | 58 
 
this assembly.  If we then apply that curvature on the toolfaces quoted, it is possible to determine a fill in survey 
at the beginning and end of each slide by using the approximation that the inclination change will be: 
 
DLS x length x cos(Toolface) and the azimuth change will be the DLS x length x sin(Toolface) / sin(Inclination) 
 
-  where DLS means dogleg severity in degrees per unit length. This allows us to complete surveys at the start and 
end of each slide and minimum curvature will then be more valid when joining the points.  
 
This assumes that: 
1. 
The DLS is unchanged during the run 
2. 
The curvature all happens when sliding 
3. 
The toolface was constant during the slide 
 
These assumptions are very simplistic but the analysis will generally give a better idea of TVD than the assumption 
that the sparse surveys can be safely joined with 3D constant arcs. 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 

===== PAGE 59 =====
P a g e | 59 
 
9. Gyro Surveying 
9.1 Background and History of Gyros 
 
What is a Gyro? 
A Gyroscope is a device which enables us to measure or maintain an orientation in free space and rotor gyros 
specifically, operate on the principle of the conservation of angular momentum. The first gyros were built early in 
the 19th century as spinning spheres or disks (rotors), with designs incorporating one, two or three gimbals, 
providing the rotor spin axis with up to three degrees of freedom. These early systems were predominantly used 
within the academic community, to study gyroscopic effects as rotor speeds (angular momentum) could not be 
sustained for long periods, due to bearing friction effects. The development of the electric motor overcame this 
rotation decay problem and lead to the first designs of prototype gyrocompasses during the 1860’s. 
 
As with most scientific and technology advances, continued development and refinement was propagated and 
accelerated to address military applications and by the early 1900’s gyros were being used in many attitude 
control, orientation and navigation applications. Rotor gyros are still by far the most common system used by the 
oil industry. 
 
During the second half of the 20th century several additional technologies were developed and exploited 
providing gyroscopic capabilities. These included: 
• 
Vibrating Gyros 
• 
Hemispherical Resonator Gyros 
• 
Quartz Rate Sensors 
• 
MHD Sensor 
• 
Fibre Optic Gyros 
• 
Laser Gyros 
• 
MEMS Gyros 
 
The systems currently considered to have the most potential for the oil industry are the Laser and MEMS systems. 
Indeed, Inteq developed and successfully marketed and operated the highly accurate RIGS (Ring-Laser Inertial 
Gyro Surveyor) for many years servicing the North Sea. The current performance capability of the MEMS unit is 
still less than desired but is regarded as having potential for the future. 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 60 =====
P a g e | 60 
 
9.2 Oilfield Applications – A Brief History 
 
In the early years of oil well drilling the process of drilling the borehole was more of an art than a science. The 
general principals of geology and exploration were understood and followed but the effects of formation changes 
and dip on bit deflection and hence borehole trajectory were not clearly understood and largely ignored. This 
perpetuated state of ignorance lead to many unresolved lease disputes, where wells drilled and brought on 
stream, close to an adjacent lease, would often result in diminished production rates on the adjacent lease wells. 
However, as now, wells already in production were cased and the magnetic compass based survey instruments 
available, could not provide post completion trajectory data. Throughout this time, many inclination-only devices 
were developed, later versions of which were accurate to 1 or 2 degrees throughout their operating range. 
 
In 1928 Alexander Anderson published a study of Borehole Survey Inclination Data obtained from a significant 
population of wells from various locations. Anderson had developed a Pendulum Instrument, the position of 
which was recorded on film as the tool was lowered in the borehole. This publication, illustrating universal and 
significant wellbore deviation, brought focus on the extent of the problem within the industry. As a direct result 
of Andersons study, J. N. Pew, then the Vice President of Sun Oil Co. instructed a team of Engineers working out 
of the Sun Research Laboratory in Dallas, to design and develop instruments which would provide the Inclination 
of the borehole and the Direction of that Inclination within casing. The 5.5” SURWEL Gyro Instrument 
incorporated a Gyro Compass Face superimposed over a Bubble Level Unit with the permanent record obtained 
with a Camera.           
 
The Sperry Gyroscope Co. was chosen as the Gyro supplier and with each company holding a 50 per cent stake in 
the new company, the Sperry-Sun Well Surveying Company was formed and gyro referenced borehole surveying 
became a reality on 9th October 1929. 
 
9.3 Chronology of Gyro Development 
1920’s: Several designs of Inclinometers and very basic Magnetic Compasses are in use. Companies of note 
operating Directional Survey Services are H. John Eastman, Hewitt Kuster and Alexander Anderson. 
1929: First Gyro Survey Tool designed and built by Sperry-Sun Well Surveying Company, a joint venture between 
Sun Oil and Sperry Gyroscope Co. The gyro had a DC Rotor speed of 14,000 RPM and was 5.5”Dia. 
1930: Gyro Survey Tool Data used in settlement of many Lease Line violation cases in East Texas and California. 
In-Run and Out-Run Data were recorded. 
1936: Gyro Tool Intercardinal Error and Drift Curve Corrections, refined to improve accuracy of survey data in 
inclined boreholes. 
Survey Tool True Centre Correction methodology developed using a two dimensional Polar Coordinate 
System Calculation.  
1939: 1st K Monel Non Magnetic Drill Collar designed (Not a gyro but notable) 
1945: Humphrey (Gyro) provides Instrumentation to Directional Service Companies for the first time (Post 
WW11 manufacturing surplus) 
1947: Transistors developed but not yet used by industry. 
Sperry-Sun buys out Sperry Gyroscopes interest in Sperry-Sun Well Surveying Company. 
1950’s: By late 1940’s wellbores get deeper and smaller with 5” Casing frequently used necessitating a 
requirement for smaller Gyro Tools. 
1960: East Texas Railroad Commission Scandals again encourage tool development. Many wellbores are small 
diameter (5” Casing) and some have > 65 deg Inclination. 
1961: Use of Solid State Electronics for first time in Instrument Timers and Solenoids for Film Advance 
mechanisms. Computers used for Survey Calculations at the Office. Field Data continued to be hand 
calculated until mid-seventies. 
1961: Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) in the USA uses Gyro Survey Tools in 4” – 144” Dia. Test Holes, drilled 
800 – 6000 ft deep, in Nevada and Alaska. Project ends in 1976. 

===== PAGE 61 =====
P a g e | 61 
 
1962: 3” Dia. Surwell Gyro built utilizing 40,000 rpm AC Rotor. 
1964: Counter Claims made against Gyro Survey accuracy related to numerous Law Suits. A Test Pipe is laid 
down the Hurricane Messa in Utah. Over 2000ft of Aluminium Irrigation Pipe is fixed down the hillside on 
a continuously irregular course. The first 200ft was near vertical with sections of the pipe path reaching 
60-70 degs of inclination. Multiple surveys were performed with both Gyro and Magnetic tools, with 
surveys taken at 25 ft intervals. In the final analysis the accuracy of both Survey Systems were proven and 
the East Texas Claims Issues finally settled. 
1.75” Gyro Tools developed using 26,000 rpm AC Rotors. Specifically designed for Directional Drilling Tool 
Orientation and surveying of Production wells in Tubing. 
1971: Atomic Energy Commission Test Bore intersected at 6000 ft TD with Bottom Hole location land surveyed 
in at < 5 ft variance/error.  
1974: Multi-well Platform drilling is prevalent. Level Rotor Gyro System developed with glass file Mercury 
Switch used to control the inner gimbal horizontal position to +/- 1-2degs but system is sensitive to 
gimbal/switch attitude, resulting in azimuth error propagation. 
1977: Introduction of Surface Recording Gyros (SRG’s - 3” and 1.75” versions), transmitting data to surface via 
Wireline. Inner gimbal position now monitored and controlled by electronic resolver to +/- 0.01 degs 
resulting in significantly reduced error propagation. 
1978: Ferranti Full Inertial System introduced into the North Sea as reconfigured Harrier Jump Jet IN System, 
developed for Shell, Mobil, BNOC (BP) and marketed by Eastman Christiansen (Inteq). Proven Accuracy < 
1/1000 ft potentially at all attitudes.    
 
9.4 Improving Performance and Service Capability 
 
As outlined above, Gyro Survey Tools were initially and primarily introduced into the industry, to provide a means 
of obtaining or checking borehole attitude, when the wellbore was already cased, negating the application or 
repeated use of magnetic based tools (Lease Scandals). Similar conditions were to foster the requirement for 
reduced diameter tools when later legal argument ensued over deeper smaller diameter wells. However, the 
primary motivation for technology advancement has been the requirement to survey ever deeper, higher angle 
boreholes (beyond horizontal), with significant azimuthal change at greater latitudes. 
 
The first gyros used by the industry had no means of inner gimbal/spin axis control but the surveyor could 
determine its approximate position from the film record at each survey station. These gyros were originally 
intended for use up to 20 – 30 degs inclination. However, as borehole inclinations increased, hardware 
improvements were made and operational techniques were developed which enabled these tools to be used 
successfully beyond 60 degs inclination. As noted above, Gimbal Tilt control and Drift Curve correction methods 
were refined to better account for the increasingly difficult operating conditions encountered and its interactive 
effects on gyro stability and data quality at a relatively early stage. 
 
9.5 The Gyro Survey Process 
9.5.1 Surface Reference Orientation 
Prior to the use of North Seeking Gyros the gyro had to be ‘Referenced’ and set to a known bearing at surface (On 
the rig floor) before entering the borehole. On land, this was a relatively simple process involving the 
establishment of a Sight Mark or Back Sight (Reverse Sight), from a distant mark clearly visible from the rig floor 
through the Sighting Scope oriented and attached to the Survey Tool in line with the internal Gyro Compass 
Reference. This Land Sight Mark was on occasion provided by the client, using the land survey company 
responsible for locating the rig but was often determined by the well survey company, using conventional land 
survey techniques and a Magnetic Brunton Compass. For low angle wells the gyro reference was then set to the 
Grid or True North orientation (dependent on the client requirements). 
 

===== PAGE 62 =====
P a g e | 62 
 
For offshore locations this observed and required Sight Reference had either to be pre-established (for each Slot 
Position) relative to Platform Centre or calculated using distant installations or features visible from the rig floor 
rotary. If/when no feature was visible from the rig floor the Sight Orientation Reference would be transferred 
from a position external to the rig floor (e.g. Helideck). 
 
These techniques were also applicable to semi-submersible (floating) installations, with the added complication 
that the sight reference value might be subject to small but constant change. As a last resort the rigs Ships 
Compass Heading value would be used. This mobile condition had implications for both the start and end 
reference for the survey and its effect on Drift Curve closure and survey reference accuracy. 
 
When setting the Gyro Orientation Reference for higher inclination surveys the gyro would be set with the spin 
axis perpendicular (oriented across) to the wellbore path, with due account taken of the expected gyro drift rate 
and any change in the wellbore azimuth trajectory. Setting the spin axis in this attitude, provides the most stable 
orientation for gyro operation as the gimbals tilt with inclination and reduces the potential for Gimbal Lock 
(System Bearing Jam) and subsequent gyro spin out and survey miss-run. The offset reference orientation value 
(relative to True or Grid North) applied in this technique was accounted and corrected for by applying a baseline 
shift to the calculated Drift Curve. 
 
9.5.2 Gyro Drift – Precession Correction 
The vast majority of gyro surveying performed for the industry, even today, still utilises rotor systems. A spinning 
gyro rotor tends to keep its axis pointing in the same direction. This is called Gyro Rigidity. If a force is applied 
which tends to change the direction of the spin axis, the axis will move at right angles to the direction of the 
applied force. If the spin axis is horizontal and you try to tilt it, the axis will turn. If the axis is horizontal and you 
try to turn it, the spin axis will tilt. This second characteristic of a gyro is called Precession. 
 
In normal operational use, conditions such as bearing wear, Temperature Coefficients of Expansion (Inertial Mass 
Distribution – C of G) and System Attitude Change (related to a given well profile) all interact to generate a net 
force which acting on the Gyro Spin Axis cause the gyro to precess (drift from its initial orientation reference). 
 
The gyro precession experienced during a survey has historically been corrected with a Drift Curve constructed 
with drift data samples recorded during the in-run and outrun survey. The frequency and duration of drift checks 
has tended to change over time but the basic premise has always been to take samples related to time, attitude 
change and temperature (particularly for deeper, hotter surveys). Drift checks were normally taken at least every 
15 minutes, for a sample duration of 5 minutes with film systems. However, with the introduction of later Vernier 
scale readings, SRG and digital data, sampling criteria tended to change to 10 minute intervals with 3 minute 
sample duration. 
 
Drift Checks during the survey were no longer relevant or required with the advent of earlier discreet sampling 
North Seeking Systems (more later). However, they are beneficial and recommended when operating the current 
North Seeking Systems in continuous Dynamic Mode where the individual or calculated survey sample stations 
are not determined by discreet north seek sensing. 
 
The drift correction data is then either applied on its own or as a super set to the Gyro Calibration Model (current 
systems). The calculated real-time drift correction curve is tied and closed to the start and end reference data, be 
it a sight observation or north seek reference as in current technology systems. 
 
9.5.3 True Centre Correction (or Offset Centre Correction) 
From an early stage it was recognised that a gyro survey tool had inherent misalignments associated with the 
modular structure of the Instrument Stack and more particularly the vane type centralization (Weatherford) 
which was universally adopted for running in both open and cased hole. These centralizers were not a precision 
piece of manufactured equipment and variants of this centralizer design, all be it with improved centralization 

